[Platform-provided behaviors for CE] Address feedback, add alternative to main proposal (#1340)
MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers: PlatformProvidedBehaviors/explainer.md

- `name`
- `value`

*Note: `HTMLButtonElement` adds the properties listed above on top of `HTMLElement`. Custom elements already inherit the global `HTMLElement` IDL surface (`title`, `tabIndex`, `hidden`, etc.). Web authors can use these properties on the host as they would on any element.*

To expose these properties to external code, authors define getters and setters on the host that delegate to the behavior. See [Use case: Design system button](#use-case-design-system-button) for a complete worked example.

Form override values (`formAction`, `formEnctype`, `formMethod`, `formNoValidate`, `formTarget`, `name`, `value`) are read from `behavior` properties. Setting a value declaratively in markup (e.g., `<my-button formaction="/save">`) or programmatically (e.g. `setAttribute('formaction', '/save')`) has no effect on form submission unless the author explicitly forwards that attribute to the `behavior`. However, some element attributes are applied to form submission as part of the existing [form-associated custom element](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/custom-elements.html#form-associated-custom-elements) mechanism.

### Behavior lifecycle

> Calling `attachInternals()` with behaviors adds each behavior's event handlers and the default ARIA role is applied. Disconnecting the element from the DOM leaves event handlers attached but suspends them, while behavior state (`formAction`, `disabled`, etc.) is preserved. Reconnecting reactivates event handling against the preserved state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calling `attachInternals()` with behaviors adds each behavior's event handlers and the ARIA associated with that behavior is applied. Disconnecting the element from the DOM leaves event handlers attached but suspends them, while behavior state (`formAction`, `disabled`, etc.) is preserved. Reconnecting reactivates event handling against the preserved state.
```
The suggested change tries to clarify what "default role" means here.

> Calling `attachInternals()` with behaviors adds each behavior's event handlers and the default ARIA role is applied. Disconnecting the element from the DOM leaves event handlers attached but suspends them, while behavior state (`formAction`, `disabled`, etc.) is preserved. Reconnecting reactivates event handling against the preserved state.

Reviewer: > Disconnecting the element from the DOM leaves event handlers attached but suspends them

It's unclear what "suspends them" means here. If I have a native `<button>` with an `onclick` handler and I remove it from the DOM, if I call `button.click()` the `onclick` handler still gets called. We probably want to match that behavior. So I'm not sure any explicit suspension of event handlers is desirable.

Even with an explicit role, this pattern may confuse users who expect consistent behavior from elements announced as buttons or links. Authors should evaluate whether their use case requires both behaviors or if a single semantic (button or link) would better serve users.

## Future work

The behavior pattern can be extended to additional behaviors. The following are concrete near-term candidates:

- **Generic Buttons**: `HTMLButtonBehavior` for non-submitting buttons (popover invocation, commands).
- **Reset Buttons**: `HTMLResetButtonBehavior` for form resetting.
- **Labels**: `HTMLLabelBehavior` for `for` attribute association and focus delegation.
- **Radio Groups**: `HTMLRadioGroupBehavior` for `name`-based mutual exclusion.

### Behavior composition and conflict resolution

The current proposal only introduces `HTMLSubmitButtonBehavior`, so composition with other behaviors is a forward-looking concern. Once additional behaviors land (see candidates above), an element may attach more than one. Behaviors can conflict in several ways

- Different default roles.
- Different ways to handle the same event.
- The same property with different values

> The proposed resolution policy is last-in-wins for properties and additive for event default actions. The position of behaviors in the array determines which behavior's value takes effect.

Reviewer 2: I envision we'll want this defined and agreed upon rather than it being a _forward looking concern_. Your proposal here seems reasonable to me; any reason to not propose this?

    });
  }
}
customElements.define('multi-action-button', MultiActionButton);

const form = document.querySelector('form');
const btn = document.createElement('multi-action-button');
form.append(btn);

// `disabled` is defined by both behaviors. Last-in-wins applies, so the host's
// effective disabled state matches HTMLResetButtonBehavior (last in the array).
btn._submitBehavior.disabled = true;
btn._resetBehavior.disabled = false;
console.log(btn.matches(':disabled'));  // false

// `formAction` is only defined by HTMLSubmitButtonBehavior, so the platform
// reads it directly from that behavior.
btn._submitBehavior.formAction = '/submit';

// Role resolution: both behaviors expose role "button". An author-set
// `internals.role` still overrides any behavior default.
console.log(btn.computedRole);  // "button"
btn._internals.role = 'link';
console.log(btn.computedRole);  // "link"
```

For events, behavior responses follow the platform's existing default action model:

1. The event dispatches through the DOM.
2. All author-registered event listeners run during dispatch.
3. After dispatch completes, each behavior's default action runs unless a listener called `preventDefault()`.

> When `btn` is clicked:

Reviewer 2: non-blocking; should we just link to a section that outlines event propagation since it doesn't seem like you're changing current behavior?

- Author event listeners run during event dispatch.
- `HTMLSubmitButtonBehavior`'s default action runs (the form submits).
- `HTMLResetButtonBehavior`'s default action runs (the form resets).
- If any listener called `preventDefault()`, both default actions are cancelled.
- `stopImmediatePropagation()` prevents subsequent listeners on the same element from running, but does not affect behavior default actions.

### Developer-defined behaviors

> A future extension of this proposal could allow developers to define their own reusable behaviors by subclassing an `ElementBehavior` base class. This would enable patterns like polyfilling upcoming platform behaviors and composing developer-defined behaviors with platform-provided ones. This direction is explored in a separate document: [Developer-defined behaviors](developer-defined-behaviors.md). It is not part of the current proposal and should be treated as forward-looking exploration.

Reviewer 2: I'm curious what others think but I don't want to bring this up in this proposal. Let that proposal stand on its own once we know developers need it and this aspect has landed.
